Picture this. A young adult man out of
shape, living in his mother's basement,
eating junk food, playing video games,
and has a bottom of the barrel job. For
a long time, this has been comic relief
in popular culture. What self-respecting
30-year-old would have such a life? He's
obviously a loser who doesn't try in
life, so we can laugh at this character
to make ourselves feel better. 25 years
ago, this situation was seen as comic
relief. And I'm not just saying that.
This clip from the year 2000 is from a
show called Get a Life, and it features
the main character, Chris Peterson.
Let me just say this as precisely as I
possibly can. You're 30 years old. You
still live with your parents. You're
losing your hair
and you're stupid.
Yet, you know, I think that just about
covers it.
Now, this scene doesn't exactly ring the
same in the mid 2020s. It's fairly
common today to have men in their late
20s and early 30s living at home. In
fact, in the US, 55% of 18 to 30year-old
men still live at home. In Australia,
that number is around 54%. Something
that people joked about in movies or on
TV 25 years ago is basically the norm
today for men. Women are doing better in
this department with less of them living
at home, but also they're doing better
in education. In recent years, this
issue has taken the limelight and it's
got a lot of people asking, why are
young men falling behind?
It wasn't so long ago that men enjoyed a
clear advantage in American society. But
these days, a different story is
emerging. Men and boys falling behind.
Boys are not simply falling behind
relative to girls, but they're falling
behind in absolute terms from their from
prior generations of boys. If a group is
falling behind in society, we don't tell
them to pick themselves up by their
bootstraps. We spend billions of money
in taxpayer funded charities and think
tanks to try and work out what's going
on and to try and bring them along for
the ride. That's not happening with men.
They don't have a stable job, a wife, a
white picket fence, or little rug rats
running around the house. They often
tried to follow their parents' way of
life, but it just doesn't work. It seems
somewhere along the way they messed up.
They think to themselves, "I choked. I
got lazy. But is it really their fault?
Or is it a failing system?"
[Music]
You are watching Till Fusion TV.
But it's now clear that there are many
boys and men who have fallen behind and
that we have to be able to think about
gender inequality in both directions.
One thing that makes that hard is that
the changes have been so quick, so rapid
that it's hard to update our beliefs to
match the new facts. It's a bit like the
needles on a compass swinging round.
Suddenly, north is south and south is
north. It's really quite disorienting.
But it's clear that on some measures at
least now men are lagging uh quite a way
behind not least on college campuses.
That reflects the fact that boys are
trailing girls throughout the education
system.
2/3 of the top academic performers in
high school measured by GPA are girls
and 2/3 of those at the bottom are boys.
It's not just in the US. If we look at
the 20 most economically advanced
countries in the world, there's on
average a 13 percentage point gap in the
share of young men and young women with
a college degree, with young women much
more likely to have a college degree.
And in some nations, the gap is much
bigger.
Just last year, in a Wall Street Journal
article titled, "America's young men are
falling even further behind," journalist
Rachel Wolf decided to follow a family
of six, the Morenos. All in all, a
normal family. The thing was, while
their only daughter recently graduated
from business school and got engaged,
her three brothers, well into adulthood,
are still living with their parents in
their childhood bedrooms. When the
father was asked about the situation, he
stated, quote, "Something is a miss
here. We love them. We love having them
around, but that's not how you build
your life." End quote. When they asked
one of the sons, Daniel, if he shared
this concern, he said, quote, "I just
felt so, so lost. Nothing is really
stopping me. It's just myself standing
in my own way." End quote. For Daniel, a
lot of this had to do with co a loss of
connection with his friends led him to
drop out of school and become aimless. A
study in 2021 by the Survey Center on
American Life found that only 26% of men
reported having six or more close
friends. In 1990, it was 55%.
And in 2021, those who had zero friends
were 17%. In 1990, it was 3.4%. 4%.
That's a 500% increase in men with zero
friends since 1990.
Research also shows that women tend to
invest more in maintaining their
friendships than men do. So, female
friendship rates tend to be higher.
But while CO may have made many men
drift apart, including Daniel, something
else is going on here. CO didn't cause
every man to start falling behind and
also not in the same way. In the US, the
percentage of men living at home between
the ages of 25 and 34 has virtually
doubled since the 1980s. So what gives?
Well, rising house prices are an obvious
factor in the West. So there's less
shame in living in a generational
household, but it goes deeper.
Regardless of affiliation, the broader
consensus over the last 3 to 5 years
appears to be that traditionally
male-dominated industries like
manufacturing are shrinking while
service industries are reaching all-time
highs around the world. And those
sectors are the ones that men aren't
conventionally trained to excel in. Just
the statistical reality puts young men
at a disadvantage. And that's not all.
Traditionally, male-dominated fields are
more commonly accepting of women.
Ultimately, that's a good thing. But it
does provide extra competition for men.
And women looking for a job or even a
career are discovering there is a whole
new world out there.
As it turns out, roles traditionally
filled by men now being offered to
women. Here's three on your sides, Gary
Harper.
This iron worker has made a successful
career for herself.
I love physical work.
You may find Adrienne Dado 30 feet above
the ground welding and using a handheld
jackhammer. She even worked for the same
company through two pregnancies.
They were very supportive.
Iron workers are just one of many fields
now trying to recruit women. The
industry just announced a new paid
maternity benefits.
They going to make good money, but
they're going to have great benefits to
go along with it. So, they'll have that
health insurance and a pension plan.
In the world of dating, things are
changing for young men, too. When it
comes to dating, for many Gen Z men,
they can practically kiss that goodbye.
In the US, for example, during the 1970s
and 80s, the percentage of men who
weren't married by age 40 were in the
single digits. But by 2021, that had
ballooned to 28%.
As young men struggle to excel in life,
they tend to appear less attractive to a
lot of women. Word on the street is that
young women just can't find a good man
anymore, so many quit dating altogether.
But the culture has also shifted.
According to the Washington Post, the
MeToo movement of the mid2010s caused
men to be reluctant to approach women in
real life for fear of being perceived as
a threat. We're going to talk about the
consistent phenomenon of men not
approaching women when they're out, when
they're at the coffee place, when
they're at the workplace. It's I guess
just a plague upon society that is
impacting young women right now who want
to be approached and who want a little
bit of attention to be paid to them. In
the age group of 18 to 25 for young men,
around 50% of them say they have never
approached a woman, not once, not ever.
Now, when asked why they can't find this
drive to do so, most of them are
expressing that they don't want to be
seen as a creep or be accused of sexual
harassment in the wake of this whole me
too movement thing that's happened.
That being said, I've heard and seen a
lot of stories about how young men
behave out there and they're really not
helping themselves. What's that? I have
only gone from like the boy meets girl
to like hell level destruction. This guy
at the gas station comes up to me. He is
smoking a cigarette, blows the smoke in
my face, and says, "I really want to
hang out with you tonight." I said,
"Oh."
So, like most things, there's two sides
to this. Reduced only to dating apps,
men tried their luck for companionship
there. Unfortunately, it's been a rough
game. Each woman would receive thousands
of matches. While it's not unusual for a
man to be swiping for days and not
receive anything, as for the last layer
in a sandwich of bad misfortune, there's
also a forming political polarization
between the genders. Gen Z men are
swinging conservative while Gen Z women
are more liberal. The end result is a
silent gender conflict among young
people, and more young men end up being
single than ever before. Even the men
that are doing better, the ones that are
out of the house, possibly married, and
building families, there's still
remarkably similar issues. As Richard
Reeves puts it, quote, "The sense a lot
of young men have is not being sure that
they're needed or that they're going to
be needed by their families, by their
communities, by society." End quote.
Both groups are now struggling more than
ever to find a driving force, to find
meaning. They are losing a sense of
purpose. Around 2016, the dialogue
around young men and a loss of sense of
purpose started to gain traction in the
Western world. It was most famously
expressed by the confusion in why
figures like Jordan Peterson and Joe
Rogan were suddenly popular among young
men. A decade ago, these online
personalities filled a hole which was
routinely overlooked as a target
audience. Male role models for young
men. Like it or not, the online spheres
they created provided direction to young
men who found themselves aimless in a
rapidly changing world. The conversation
took on a more academic flavor in 2022
when Richard Reeves published his
findings in his book of boys and men. It
highlighted a disparity that he had to
research to believe. At the same time,
another author, Scott Galloway, started
touring the country with a similar
message. His emphasis though was on
later education, employment, and dating
as an adult. When on a podcast by Chris
Williamson, the open statistics he
shared were pretty revealing.
I have friends who have two daughters
and a son. And I I'm saying this
metaphorically, but loosely speaking,
the daughters at Penn, the younger
daughters working at a PR firm in
Chicago, and the son is in their
basement vaping and playing video games.
young men, seven to 10 high school
valadictorians or girls. For every one
male college graduate over the next five
years, there's going to be two female
college graduates. 93% of mass shooters
are men. Three times more likely to to
overdose. Four times more likely to
commit suicide. 12 more times more
likely to be incarcerated. They do worse
in single parent households. For some
reason, girls have the same outcomes in
a dual parent household versus a single.
We have more single parent households.
Our education system is biased against
men. Men on a behavior adjusted or boys
on a behavior adjusted voices are twice
as likely to get suspended for the same
infraction as a girl. 2/3 to 80% of all
primary and secondary teachers are are
women and understandably they're going
to champion little girls who they see
themselves in. Galloway also explains
that the lack of attention to impulse
control in young men borders on criminal
neglect. Not only that, but according to
both Reeves and Galloway, this lack of
focus has all but guaranteed that in an
equal sex opportunity system, placing an
18-year-old male next to an 18-year-old
female for a job or college application
puts men at an immediate disadvantage.
Yeah. The the delta I've heard that's
striking. The delta I've heard is 2
years. But even if you think about two
years, you basically if you have two
18-year-old people applying to college,
basically the 18-year-old is is
competing against the 16-year-old.
So imagine imagine you're in 10th grade
applying to college and all the girls
are in 12th grade. That's that's what
we're facing right now.
The disparity has doubled the number of
stay-at-home fathers, which may not
sound like a totally bad thing on paper,
but there's a lot of men that aren't
happy with their situation. And in
search of answers, it opens the door to
troubling influences by online gurus.
It wasn't unusual to see younger males,
married or not, being told to reclaim
masculinity through affairs,
mistreatment of partners and spouses,
and even walking away from traditional
responsibilities.
Other people when things aren't going
well for them. And so, what do the most
violent, dangerous societies all have in
common? They all have a disproportionate
number of the most dangerous person on
the planet, a young, broken, alone man.
and we're just producing way too many of
them and we can't even have an honest
conversation about it because the moment
you start evangelizing for young men.
The moment you're seen as quote unquote
pro- young men, the natural assumption
is that means you're anti- women because
admittedly there's some guys out there
on TikTok claiming to be trying to get
men confidence that basically it's
basically thinly veiled misogyny.
Yes. referring to women as [__] and
you got to own the [__] and you got
to get out there, take my class for $49
a month and you'll get the money and put
the [__] in their like Jesus Christ.
That's what young men are are
susceptible to. It's
and we should pay attention because the
longer this happens, the more it becomes
a lose-lose game for everyone. On the
extreme end of the spectrum, there's a
belief that men will become obsolete.
But most sane people understand that men
and women need each other. We understand
the traits that both possess and both
are more than necessary for a functional
society. The truth is that the system is
failing and it's been failing for an
incredibly long time. And nowhere is
this more noticeable than the modern
education system.
Over the past 15 years, the crisis among
young men in the classroom has been
discussed in small circles, but the
conversation is growing rapidly. Male
performance in school has been a real
issue. But the thing is, this change
might be a lot older than you realize.
It didn't start with Instagram or Tik
Tok. The split between young men and
women in academia started in the 1970s
in the US. It was after a landmark piece
of legislation called Title 9. It
prohibits gender discrimination in
educational programs and activities
receiving federal funding.
Similar laws were also passed in the UK
and Canada during the 1970s. And of
course, this was definitely a step in
the right direction for educational
equality, but it had an unintended
consequence. The paradigm shifted into a
belief that young men had already made
it. From here on out, the majority of
resources should be diverted towards
improving schooling for the opposite
gender.
Richard Reeves, who had been studying
the gaps in development for years, says
that this isn't really a battle of the
sexes, at least not entirely. It's a
complex crisis of neglect where for a
long time young boys were seen as doing
just fine. The focus was on uplifting
young females in education. And that's
fine. That's great even. But while that
goal was being worked towards, young men
silently started to slip. According to
the UNESCO Institute for Statistics,
enrollment rates signal a sign of
success. On the plus side, the gaps
between young men and women are starting
to narrow. But conversely, and what they
fail to mention is that male enrollment
is visibly starting to stagnate or even
become worse, especially for primary
education. The gap for university
enrollment is almost at 10% for half of
European countries. It doesn't matter if
it's Bosnia and Herzuggavina, Sweden, or
elsewhere. Virtually everywhere in the
West sees more females enrolled in
university than men. I personally think
it's great that more women are being
educated. Most reasonable people will
agree that opening the gates of success
for everyone is a good thing. But the
focus here in this episode is that the
trajectory of males isn't looking good.
There's a concerning and significant gap
in performance as far back as elementary
school and women consistently outpace
men in college attendance. A New York
Times survey found both male and female
teenagers when talking about those
closest to them say this. Twothirds of
both genders agree that the young men
that they study with are more
disruptive, lack leadership skills, and
have difficulty relating to teachers in
the classroom. Unfortunately, even when
young boys are growing up at home before
school, they're not being educated to
the same extent either, especially when
it comes to literacy. It's not a hard
and fast rule, but a recent study from
Harper Collins found that, quote, only
29% of boys aged 0 to2 are read to daily
or nearly daily compared to 44% of girls
of the same age. Other studies show that
fathers are less likely to read to their
sons than their daughters, and that both
parents are less likely to encourage
boys to read at all. As a result, boys
tend to read less, choose simpler books,
and struggle to finish them. All of
which affects their reading
comprehension and their academic
readiness, but surprisingly also their
empathy and pro-social behavior. And
this is something that a lot of parents
don't even realize they're facilitating.
The academic readiness gap is something
that we discovered first because it's
measurable. We can see it in test
scores, graduation rates, and class
participation. However, the social
component is often overlooked. The boys
can just play with their toys all day,
and that's fine. Less value being placed
on young male development is already
showing unfavorable results for
millennials. And now that the oldest
members of Gen Z are approaching 30
years of age, we're already beginning to
witness an emergence of a male class
that is uniquely isolated and unable to
properly interact with the outside
world. So, what can we say about future
generations in the next 10 to 20 years?
If we're not careful, we could see more
generations of full-g grown men aimless,
living alone, or debating with
themselves about the future, like the
Mono brothers at the start of this
episode.
So, the question is, how do we fix this?
Well, here's a quick fire round of
solutions to get us out of this mess.
Number one, early intervention. A study
by the National Bureau of Economic
Research states to prioritize reading in
years 1 to four where boys fall behind
first.
Number two, consistent routines, family
outreach, and inschool tutoring helped
attendance according to the Education
Policy Institute. Number three,
mentoring and social emotional coaching
for teenage boys as another angle. For
example, Chicago's Becoming a Man
program cut violent crime arrests by 45
to 50% and lifted on-time graduation by
12 to 19%.
Number four, a stronger path from school
to apprenticeships. High-quality
apprenticeships raise employment and
earnings. And now, especially with the
state of universities and AI threats.
This could be a bright spot. Programs
like Year Up and Per Scholars produce
large sustained earning gains for young
adults, exactly where many young men
stall. Number five, male friendly mental
health. In Australia, men's sheds reduce
isolation and support well-being. Head
space for 12 to 25 year olds is another
option. And finally, number six,
paternity leave and engaged fatherhood.
According to Childare Canada, when leave
is also reserved for dads, a father's
involvement in child rearing rises
meaningfully. The downstream benefits of
the child's development and schooling
follow. That helps the next cohort of
boys.
So, what do we make of all of this? The
truth is, all of the experts highlighted
have a lot of theories about how we got
here. Some think it's the sole product
of feminism, while others blame online
influencers. But the experts do also
provide some solutions. According to
Reeves, there are simple and easy steps
that would make an immediate impact on
male underperformance. We need to
recruit hundreds of thousands more male
teachers, especially in subjects like
English where the boys are struggling so
much and which is the subject men are
least likely to be teaching.
And here I think we can draw some really
good lessons from the successful
movement to get more women and girls
interested in STEM subjects. So that
means setting clear targets, launching
public campaigns,
and offering financial scholarships to
men who want to enter teaching as a
profession.
Care specialist Erica Commissa wants to
take things further. She points to
studies showing that single gender
schools produce better adjusted young
men and women.
It seems clear to me that it is the
system which is disabling rather than
the boys who are disabled.
Now there's a lot we can do to make the
education system work better for boys.
Let's start with those two big problems
of later brain development and lack of
male teachers. So first we should start
boys in school a year later.
And the idea there is to level the
playing field given those differences in
the timing of brain development. And
actually that's already quite common
practice at private schools and in lots
of affluent communities. But it's
actually not the boys from rich families
who will benefit the most from that
extra year. It's the boys from lower
income, poorer neighborhoods and
families who would most benefit from the
gift.
Obviously many of these ideas go beyond
the current beliefs of how men and women
should be raised. But according to the
data, this is exactly why things need to
change and they need to change fast.
Today, we have a crisis in young male
demographics. It doesn't matter if
you're rich. It doesn't matter if you're
poor. The fact of the matter is young
men are falling behind. And this has to
do with priorities. During our noble
effort to make things more equal, we
forgot that this requires everyone to
receive an equal amount of attention,
compassion, and commitment to keep
things stable. The mistakes of the past
30 years are prevalent now, but it's not
too late to change things for the next
generation. Also, if you've watched this
whole video and are experiencing
anything I've talked about, leave your
comment as it will be cool to get a
community discussion going. As we've
seen today, a lot of young men out there
are struggling. But one way to get back
on your feet if you're struggling
professionally is by learning subjects
that will give you a leg up. That's
where today's sponsor, brilliant.org,
comes in. Brilliant is where you learn
by doing. with thousands of interactive
lessons in maths, science, data
analytics, programming, and AI. For
example, they have a course on how AI
works. It covers everything from large
language models to neural networks,
tokenization, and loss functions. Each
lesson on Brilliant allows you to play
with concepts, a method proven to be six
times more effective than watching
lecture videos. I find Brilliant useful
for refreshing myself on key subjects.
Plus, all content on Brilliant is
crafted by teachers, researchers, and
professionals from MIT, Caltech, Duke,
Microsoft, Google, and more. Learn at
your own pace to brush up on a subject
for work or just for your own
self-development to prepare yourself for
further studies. To try everything
Brilliant has to offer for free for a
full 30 days, visit
brilliant.org/coldfusion
or click the link in the description.
You'll also get 20% off an annual
premium subscription.
Hey guys, thanks for watching the whole
way through this video. I really
appreciate it and also appreciate all
your support over all the years. It's
been amazing. If you do want to watch
something else societal related, I've
done a video on the loneliness epidemic
and it goes to show that it doesn't
matter if you're male or female. There's
a lot of people going through loneliness
at the moment, so it's a pretty
important topic. But um I think that's
about it from me. Thanks for watching
and I'll catch you again soon for the
next episode. Cheers.